Update release guidance for Valkey (#94)
valkey-io/valkey-doc: topics/releases.md

1. Valkey commands including their inputs, outputs, and defined behavior
2. The functions and APIs that can be executed from a Lua script
3. The RDB version
4. The protocol used to establish and replicate data from primaries to replicas
5. The protocol between nodes within a Valkey cluster
6. The Valkey Module API interface
7. The AOF on disk format

### Patch versions

*Patch* versions are released with backwards compatible bug fixes and should not introduce new features.

Upgrading from a previous patch version should be safe and seamless.
It should be safe to run a primary-replica pair or a Valkey cluster with servers running on different patch versions.

*Patch* versions may also introduce small improvements such as performance or memory optimizations that are easy to verify as safe.

### Minor versions

*Minor* versions are released with new functionality that is added in a backward compatible manner.
Examples of new functionality include new commands, info fields, or configuration parameters.

Upgrading from a previous minor version should be safe, and will not introduce incompatibilities between servers in the cluster when default server configurations are used.

> **NOTE:** Minor releases may include new commands and data types that can introduce incompatibility between servers in the cluster, but users need to opt-in to these features to cause this type of incompatibility.

Reviewer: Here's an issue. Generally, when we introduce a new data type, the `rdb_version` is also updated accordingly. So, even if users haven't used the new data type, the newer version nodes in the cluster would already be utilizing the updated `rdb_version`. In this scenario, if data is migrated from a newer version to an older version, errors would occur.

Reviewer 2: Yes. If we want to be forward-compatible, which I think is a good idea, we need to support writing RDB in an old version and a new version. We only need to be forward compatible one version, I think.

HLD: The first time a new datatype is used, we set a global flag. When we write the RDB, we check the flag. If the flag is set, we use the new RDB version. If the flag is not set, we use the older RDB version.

Reviewer 2: @soloestoy the long term solution is AOF without RDB? valkey-io/valkey#59

---
title: "Valkey releases and versioning"
linkTitle: "Valkey releases"
weight: 4
description: How new versions of Valkey are released and supported
aliases:
    - /topics/releases
---

Valkey is usually among the most critical pieces of a software stack.
For this reason, Valkey's release cycle prioritizes highly stable releases at the cost of slower release cycles.

All Valkey releases are published in the [Valkey GitHub repository](https://github.com/valkey-io/valkey/releases).

## Versioning

Valkey stable releases will generally follow `major.minor.patch` [semantic versioning schema](https://semver.org/).
We follow semantic versioning to provide explicit guarantees regarding backward compatibility.

When discussing compatibility, we refer to the following API contracts:

1. Valkey commands including their inputs, outputs, and defined behavior
2. The functions and APIs that can be executed from a Lua script

> 3. The RDB version

Reviewer 3: AOF is the other persistence mechanism we support. It has its own on-disk format so it would be worth mentioning here too.

Author: Yeah, good point

4. The protocol used to establish and replicate data from primaries to replicas
5. The protocol between nodes within a Valkey cluster
6. The Valkey Module API interface

### Patch versions

*Patch* versions are released with backwards compatible bug fixes and should not introduce new features.

Upgrading from a previous patch version should be safe and seamless.
It should be safe to run a Valkey cluster with servers running on different patch versions.

*Patch* versions may also introduce small improvements such as performance or memory optimizations that are easy to verify as safe.

### Minor versions

*Minor* versions are released with new functionality that is added in a backward compatible manner.
Examples of new functionality include new commands, info fields, or configuration parameters.

> Upgrading from a previous minor version should be safe, and will not introduce incompatibilities between servers in the cluster.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Upgrading from a previous minor version should be safe, and will not introduce incompatibilities between servers in the cluster if default server configurations are not changed.
```

Author: I interpreted your suggestion as if you are using default configuration, behavior won't change. The current wording you have meant to me that the behavior won't change if **we** don't change default configurations, which we don't do in a minor version.

**NOTE:** Minor releases may include new commands and data types that can introduce incompatibility between servers in the cluster, but users need to opt-in to these features to cause this type of incompatibility.
For this reason, it is not recommended to run a Valkey cluster with servers running on different minor versions.
Users should avoid new features until all servers in the cluster have been upgraded.

> Commands may also be deprecated in minor versions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Commands may also be marked as `deprecated` in minor versions.
```

Author: Assuming you want this to be emphasized, I'm going to build it insteadl.

> If a command is deprecated, a replacement command or an alternative to using the command will be defined in the same minor version.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Deprecated commands are not removed, but a replacement command or an alternative to using the command will be defined in the same minor version.
```

### Major versions

*Major* versions are released with significant functionality that may break backwards compatibility or alter key performance characteristics.
Examples of significant functionality includes altering the behavior of an existing command, removing previously deprecated commands, changing the default value of configs, and significant refactoring for performance improvements.

Upgrading from a previous major version is intended to be safe, but should be approached with caution. 
You should carefully read the release notes before performing a major version upgrade.

> Major version upgrades do not guarantee backwards compatibility, which means you should always upgrade replicas before upgrading primaries in order to ensure data consistency.

Reviewer 3: >Major version upgrades do not guarantee backwards compatibility, which means you should always upgrade replicas before upgrading primaries in order to ensure data consistency.

If we don't guarantee "backwards compatibility", how do we guarantee users can always replicate a older version of Valkey to the latest major version? I wonder if we should take the similar approach like in the minor version upgrade case where potentially incompatible changes are gated behind a server config?

Author: I needed to rework this section, since we have some odd guarantees here.

The Valkey community strives to make as few backwards breaking changes as possible.
When breaking changes are required, we will also strive to provide a way to mitigate the impact without incuring downtime to your application.

## Release schedule

The Valkey community strives to release a stable major version once a year.
Stable minor versions are created as needed in between major releases, and we aim to release at least one minor version a year.

### Release candidate

New minor and major versions of Valkey begin by branching off the `unstable` branch as an initial release candidate branch with a name that takes the form of `*major.minor*`, example `7.2`.
The first release candidate, or rc1, is released once it can be used for development purposes and for testing the new version.
Release candidate versions will start with a patch version of "0" and will take the form `*major.minor.patch-rcN*`, example `7.2.0-rc1` followed by `7.2.0-rc2`.

> At this stage, most of the new features and changes in the new version are ready for review, and the version is released for the purpose of collecting the public's feedback.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
At this stage, most of the new features and changes in the new version are ready for review, and the version is released for the purpose of collecting public feedback.
```

Subsequent release candidates are released every couple of weeks, primarily for fixing bugs and refining features based off of user input.

### Stable release

Once development has ended and the feedback for release candidate slows down, it is ready for the final release. 
At this point, the release is marked as stable and is released with "0" as its patch-level version.

Patches are released as needed to fix high-urgency issues, or once a stable version accumulates enough fixes to justify it.

## Support

The latest stable release is always fully supported and maintained.

> The Valkey community will provide maintanence support, providing patch releases for bug fixes and all security fixes, for 3 years from when a version was first released.

Reviewer 3: I think we should also clarify for which minor version we will provide "maintenance support" because below we have been very explicit that only the last minor version of each major version will receive security support.

IMO, not providing security support for other minor versions in a major version makes the "maintenance support" for non-last minor versions a moot point because users need both. So I think either we should provide both support for every minor version or align maintenance support with security support so only the last minor version of each major version is considered (my preference)

```suggestion
The Valkey community will provide maintenance support, providing patch releases for bug fixes and all security fixes, for 3 years from when a version was first released.
```

Author: > IMO, not providing security support for other minor versions in a major version makes the "maintenance support" for non-last minor versions a moot point because users need both.

This is definitely not true. If there is a bug in a feature you don't use, you won't see any reason to upgrade. It'll also be easier if we say we aren't going to fix it.  Many organizations are required to follow procedures for patching security issues. We have historically had about 2 security CVE fixes per year in Redis since we have so few dependencies. 

> So I think either we should provide both support for every minor version or align maintenance support with security support so only the last minor version of each major version is considered (my preference)

Everyone I've pitched this proposal to, doesn't like it. Since it will push end users to wait until LTS versions are released and then they'll upgrade, at which point, I would prefer we just launch a single major version every year with features.

Second question, what would be the support of a minor version? I don't think it should just be until the next minor is released, that is **very** uncommon.

Reviewer 3: > If there is a bug in a feature you don't use, you won't see any reason to upgrade. 

Good point.

>If there is a security issue, you'll organization will probably make you apply it.

I read the latest revision as saying all versions (minor and major) are fully supported for up to 3 years and between year 4 and year 5, inclusive, only last minor version of each major version is supported for security. Is this understanding correct?

Here is an example, and assuming we tick-tock release every 6 months: 7.2, 8.0, 8.2, 9.0, 9.2, 10.0, 10.2, 11.0, 11.2, 12.0, and 12.2.

By the time we release 12.2, 7.2 turns 5 and 9.2 turns 3. We then have a CVE fix and a critical bug fix applicable to all these versions. With this release policy, are we saying, versions between 9.2 and 12.2, inclusive, will receive both fixes, which is 7 versions in total but 7.2 and 8.2 will receive the CVE fix only?

> The Valkey community will also provide extended security security support for the latest minor version of each major version for 5 years from when a version was first released.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Valkey community will also provide extended security support for the latest minor version of each major version for 5 years from when a version was first released.
```

Examples of significant functionality includes altering the behavior of an existing command, removing previously deprecated commands, changing the default value of configs, and significant refactoring for performance improvements.

Upgrading from a previous major version is intended to be safe, but should be approached with caution.
You should carefully read the release notes before performing a major version upgrade.
Although Major versions can introduce breaking changes, data replicated from primaries to replicas will always be sent in a backward compatible format.
You should always upgrade replicas before upgrading primaries in order to ensure data consistency.

The Valkey community strives to make as few backwards breaking changes as possible.
When breaking changes are required, we will also strive to provide a way to mitigate the impact without incurring downtime to your application.

## Release schedule

The Valkey community strives to release a stable major version once a year.
Stable minor versions are created as needed in between major releases, and we aim to release at least one minor version a year.

### Release candidate

> New minor and major versions of Valkey begin by branching off the `unstable` branch as an initial release candidate branch with a name that takes the form of `*major.minor*`, example `7.2`.
> The first release candidate, or rc1, is released once it can be used for development purposes and for testing the new version.
> Release candidate versions will start with a patch version of "0" and will take the form `*major.minor.patch-rcN*`, example `7.2.0-rc1` followed by `7.2.0-rc2`.

Reviewer 2: `` `*major.minor*` `` is rendered as `*major.minor*` with the stars visible. I think you may want to put the backticks inside the stars?

`` *`major.minor`* `` rendered as *`major.minor`*.

Another option is to just avoid backticks here. A version number isn't really code. We could combine bold and italics like

_major_**.**_minor_**.**_patch_**-rc**_N_ (where bold is fixed content and italics is variable content)

```suggestion
New minor and major versions of Valkey begin by branching off the `unstable` branch as an initial release candidate branch with a name that takes the form of *`major.minor`*, example `7.2`.
The first release candidate, or rc1, is released once it can be used for development purposes and for testing the new version.
Release candidate versions will start with a patch version of "0" and will take the form *`major.minor.patch-rcN`*, example `7.2.0-rc1` followed by `7.2.0-rc2`.
```

---
title: "Valkey releases and versioning"
linkTitle: "Valkey releases"
weight: 4

> description: How new versions of Valkey released and supported

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
description: How new versions of Valkey are released and supported
```

aliases:
    - /topics/releases
---

Valkey is usually among the most critical pieces of a software stack.
For this reason, Valkey's release cycle prioritizes highly stable releases at the cost of slower release cycles.

All Valkey releases are published in the [Valkey GitHub repository](https://github.com/valkey-io/valkey/releases).

> ## Versioning

Author: We should be more clear about the backwards compatibility about:
1. RDB Versioning
2. API versioning
3. Replication protocol
4. Cluster protocol.

Author: Modules?

Valkey stable releases will follow generally `major.minor.patch` [semantic versioning schema](https://semver.org/).
We follow semantic versioning to provide explicit guarantees regarding backward compatibility.

### Patch versions

> PATCH versions are released with backwards compatible bug fixes and should not introduce new features.

Reviewer 2: Uppercase as emphasis? It looks like a command. :)

```suggestion
*Patch* versions are released with backwards compatible bug fixes and should not introduce new features.
```

Upgrading from a previous patch version should be safe and seamless.

> It should be safe to run a Valkey cluster with servers running on different patch versions.

Reviewer 2: Speaking of cluster, we can also mention replication from/to?

Author: I didn't follow this comment.

Reviewer 3: I think @zuiderkwast is saying we support replicating from the lower version of Valkey/Redis to a higher version but no guarantee if you replicate from a higher version of Valkey to a lower version (because RDB version might get bumped - separate discussion).

Author: Ok, let me try to add a sentence to address this.

Reviewer 2: I meant just primary-replica of different patch versions, not necessarily using cluster.

```suggestion
It should be safe to run a primary-replica pair or a Valkey cluster with servers running on different patch versions.
```

Author: I understand now! I can add that.

PATCH versions may also introduce small improvements such as performance or memory optimizations that don't come with any tradeoffs.

### Minor versions

MINOR version are released with new functionality that is added in a backward compatible manner.
Examples of new functionality include new commands, info fields, or configuration parameters.

Upgrading from a previous minor version should be safe, and will not introduce incompatibilities between servers in the cluster.

**NOTE:** Minor releases may include new commands and data types that can introduce incompatibility between servers in the cluster, but users need to opt-in to these features to cause this type of incompatibility.
For this reason, it is not recommended to run a Valkey cluster with servers running on different minor versions.

> Users should also avoid new features until all servers in the cluster have been upgrades.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Users should also avoid new features until all servers in the cluster have been upgraded.
```

Commands may also be deprecated in minor versions.
If a command is deprecated, a replacement command or an alternative to using the command will be defined in the same minor version.

### Major versions

MAJOR versions are released with significant functionality that may break backwards compatibility or alter key performance characteristics.
Examples of significant functionality include altering the behavior of an existing command, removing previously deprecated commands, changing the default value of configs, and significant refactoring for performance improvements.

Upgrading from a previous major version is intended to be safe, but should be approached with caution. 
You should carefully read the release notes before performing a major version upgrade.

> Major version upgrades do not guarantee backwards compatibility, which means you should always upgrade replicas before upgrading primaries in order to ensure data consistency.

Reviewer 2: How to do rolling upgrade in a cluster or sentinel is described somewhere in the docs, right? Can we link to it?

Author: I couldn't find an example of it. It's on the list of stuff we should document better. https://github.com/valkey-io/valkey-doc/issues/115

The Valkey community strives to make as few backwards breaking changes as possible.
When breaking changes are required, we will also strive to provide a way to mitigate the impact without incuring downtime to your application.

## Release schedule

The Valkey community strives to release a stable major version once a year.
Stable minor versions are created as needed in between major releases, and we aim to release at least one minor version a year.

### Release candidate

> New minor and major versions of Valkey begin by branching off the `unstable` branch as an initial release candidate branch, which take the form *major.minor.patch-R#*.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
New minor and major versions of Valkey begin by branching off the `unstable` branch as an initial release candidate branch, which take the form *major.minor.patch-RC#*.
```

Reviewer 2: The release candidate *branch* is just *major.minor*.

The release candidate *tags* are with lowercase "rc" IIRC. I don't know if it's clear (in all parts of the world) that '#' is a place-holder for a digit. Can we use N or something instead, like "_X.Y.Z_-**rc**_N_", or by example *8.0.0-rc1*, *8.0.0-rc2*, etc.

The patch number is always 0 in release canditates?

Subsequent release candidates are released every coupe of weeks, primarily for fixing bugs and refining features based off of user input.

### Stable release

Once development has ended and the feedback for release candidate slows down, it is ready for the final release. 
At this point, the release is marked as stable and is released with "0" as its patch-level version.

Patches are released as needed to fix high-urgency issues, or once a stable version accumulates enough fixes to justify it.

## Support

The latest stable release is always fully supported and maintained.

The Valkey community will provide maintanence support, providing patch releases for bug fixes and all security fixes, for 3 years from when a version was first released.

The Valkey community will also provide extended security security support for the latest minor version of each major version for 5 years from when a version was first released.
The Valkey community will only backport security issues we believe to be possible to exploit, which will be up to the discretion of the TSC.

> For contacting the core team on sensitive matters and security issues, please see [SECURITY.md](https://github.com/valkey-io/valkey/blob/unstable/SECURITY.md).

Reviewer 2: Here, "TCS" and "core team" are used as synonyms, but I don't know if all readers know that.

### List of supported versions

| Version | Initial release | Maintenence support end | Extended Security support end |
| -- | -- | -- | -- |
| 7.2 | 2024-04-16 | 2027-04-16 | 2029-04-16 |

## Unstable tree

> The unstable development tree of Valkey is located in the `unstable` branch in the [Valkey GitHub repository](https://github.com/valkey-io/valkey).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The development tree of Valkey is located in the `unstable` branch in the [Valkey GitHub repository](https://github.com/valkey-io/valkey).
```
